docs(package): Add user documents for retention control; Add garbage collector to the multi-node guide. (#1181)
y-scope/clp: docs/src/user-guide/guides-retention.md

:::

## Definitions

This section defines the terms and criteria used by CLP to determine when data should be 
deleted.

### Terms

- **Current Time (T):** The wall-clock time at which the garbage collector job is executed.
- **Retention Period (TTL):** The configured duration after which data is considered expired.

### Expiry criteria

- **Archive Expiry:**  
  An archive is considered expired if its largest log message timestamp exceeds the retention
  period:  
  ```text
  archive.largest_msg_ts < T - TTL
  ```
:::{note}
Archives whose log messages do not contain timestamps are not subject to retention.
:::

:::{caution}
Archive expiry is based on the `timestamp of the log messages`, not on when the archive is
compressed. Compressing old logs with retention enabled could cause those archives to be deleted
immediately after compression.
:::

- **Search Result Expiry:** 
  A search result is considered expired if it's finish time exceeds the retention period:
  ```text
  search_job.finished_time < T - TTL.
  ```

## Configuration
Retention setting can be configured in `etc/clp-config.yml`.

### Configure retention period

> To configure a retention period, update the `retention_period`
> key in `etc/clp-config.yml` with desired retention period in minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure a retention period, update the `retention_period` key in `etc/clp-config.yml` with the
desired retention period in minutes.
```
lint and added "the"

For example, to configure an archive retention period of 30 days (43,200 minutes):
```yaml
archive_output:
  # Other archive output specific settings

  # Retention period for archives, in minutes. 
  # Set to null to disable automatic deletion.
  retention_period: 43200
```

### Configure sweep interval

> **Sweep interval** specifies the interval at which garbage collector jobs run to collect and delete
> expired data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Sweep interval** specifies the time interval at which garbage collector jobs run to collect and
delete expired data.
```
add "time" and adjust line length accordingly

> To configure a custom sweep frequency for different retention targets, set the fields under
> `garbage_collector.sweep_interval` in `etc/clp-config.yml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure a custom sweep frequency for different retention targets, you can set the subfields
under `garbage_collector.sweep_interval` individually in `etc/clp-config.yml`. For example, to
configure a sweep interval of 15 minutes for search results but 3 hours (180 minutes) for archives,
enter the following:
```
modified for clarity

```yaml
garbage_collector:
  logging_level: "INFO"

  # Interval (in minutes) at which garbage collector jobs run
  sweep_interval:

>     archive: <sweep_interval>
>     search_result: <sweep_interval>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    archive: 180
    search_result: 15
```
to match the example I suggested above

```

:::{note}
If the retention period is set to `null`, the corresponding garbage collection task will not run 
even if `sweep_interval` is configured.
:::

> ## Handle race condition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Handling data race conditions
```

> Retention is designed to avoid the race condition where it deletes archives that might still be in
> use by active search jobs.
> CLP employs the following mechanisms to avoid race conditions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CLP's retention system is designed to avoid data race conditions that may arise from the deletion of
archives or search results that may still be in use by active jobs. CLP employs the following
mechanisms to avoid these conditions:
```

- If any query job is running, CLP conservatively calculates a **safe expiry timestamp** based on 
  the earliest active search job. This ensures no archive that could be searched is deleted.

- CLP will **not** search an archive once it is considered expired, even if it has not yet been
  deleted by the garbage collector.

:::{warning}
A hanging search job will prevent CLP from deleting expired archives. 

> Restarting the query scheduler will mark such jobs as failed and allow retention to resume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Restarting the query scheduler will mark such jobs as failed and allow garbage collection to resume.
```

:::

## Fault tolerance
The garbage collector can resume execution from where it left off if a previous run fails. 
This design ensures that CLP does not fall into an inconsistent state due to partial deletions.

> If the CLP package stops unexpectedly (for example, due to a host machine shutdown) when a garbage
> collection task was running, simply restart the package and the garbage collector will continue 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the CLP package stops unexpectedly (for example, due to a host machine shutdown) while a garbage
collection task is running, simply restart the package and the garbage collector will continue 
```
verb tense/word choice

from the point of failure.

:::{note}

> During failure recovery, there may be a temporary period when an archive is deleted from the
> database but still exists on disk or in object storage. Once recovery completes, the physical

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During failure recovery, there may be a temporary period during which an archive no longer exists in
the database, but still exists on disk or in object storage. Once recovery is complete, the physical
```
clarity

- If any query job is running, CLP conservatively calculates a **safe expiry timestamp** based on 
  the earliest active search job. This ensures no archive that could be searched is deleted.

- CLP will **not** search an archive once it is considered expired, even if it has not yet been
  deleted by the garbage collector.

:::{warning}
A hanging search job will prevent CLP from deleting expired archives. 
Restarting the query scheduler will mark such jobs as failed and allow garbage collection to resume.
:::

## Fault tolerance
The garbage collector can resume execution from where it left off if a previous run fails. 
This design ensures that CLP does not fall into an inconsistent state due to partial deletions.

If the CLP package stops unexpectedly (for example, due to a host machine shutdown) while a garbage
collection task is running, simply restart the package and the garbage collector will continue 
from the point of failure.

:::{note}
During failure recovery, there may be a temporary period during which an archive no longer exists in
the database, but still exists on disk or in object storage. Once recovery is complete, the physical
archive will also be deleted.

> :::

Reviewer: nit: put an empty line at the end of the file (not required but I think it's good form)

# Retention control in CLP

CLP supports retention control to free up storage space by periodically deleting outdated archives
and search results. Retention applies to both the local filesystem and object storage.

This process is managed by background **garbage collector** jobs, which scan for and delete expired
data based on configured retention settings in `etc/clp-config.yml`.

:::{note}
By default, retention control is disabled, and CLP retains data indefinitely.
:::

---

## Definitions
CLP supports retention control for archives and search results.
At a high level, CLP compares a data item's timestamp with the current time to determine whether
it has expired, but the criteria differ slightly between archives and search results.

This section explains the terms and criteria CLP uses to decide when data should be deleted.

### Terms

> - **Current Time (T):** The present wall-clock time when data expiry is being evaluated.

Author: True

- **Retention Period (TTL):** The configured duration for which CLP retains data before it is
  considered expired.
- **Archive's timestamp (archive.T):** The most recent timestamp among all log messages
  contained in the archive.
- **Search result's timestamp (search_result.T):** The timestamp when a search result is inserted
  into the results_cache.

  :::{Note}
  1. Archive's timestamp is based on the **timestamp of its log messages**, not on when the archive
  is compressed. Compressing old logs with retention enabled could cause those archives to be
  deleted immediately after compression.
  
  2. Archives whose log messages do not contain timestamps are not subject to retention.

>   :::

Author: I moved the first point to the archive timestamp with some repharsing, but it also looks very wordy. @kirkrodrigues do you have any suggestions?

### Expiry criteria

- **Archive Expiry:**  
  An archive is considered expired if its retention period has elapsed since archive's timestamp,

>   i.e. that the difference between `T` and `archive.T` has surpassed `TTL`.

Author: since we define "archive timestamp" to be of latest message's one, I feel we don't need to explicity mention about the "most recent" again.

  ```text
  if (T - archive.T > TTL) then EXPIRED
  ```

  For example, if a compressed archive has `archive.T = 16:00` with a `TTL = 1 hour`, it will be
  considered expired after `T = 17:00` since `T - 16:00 > 1:00` for all `T > 17:00`(for simplicity,

>   we omit dates and seconds from the timestamp).

Author: @kirkrodrigues Any comment on the "for simplicity..." part?

>   we omit dates and seconds from the timestamp).

Reviewer 2: I think we should keep the parenthetical since some folks may get confused. But I think we should move it after the first timestamp.

  :::{caution}
  Retention control operates on **UTC timestamps** and assumes that archive timestamps are also in
  UTC. Using archives with local timestamps can lead to an effective `TTL` that is different from 
  the intended value.

  In the example above, if the package operates in EST (UTC-4) and `archive.T = 16:00` is a local
  timestamp, then at 16:30 local time, the garbage collector first converts 16:30 EST to 20:30 UTC
  and the calculation would be `20:30 - 16:00 > 1:00`.
  In this case, the archive would be determined to be expired and deleted, even though it has not 

>   actually reached its intended retention period.

Author: personally I would avoid EDT because it caused some confusions in the past. maybe I will use EST and offset everything by 5 instead,

  To avoid this issue, either generate logs with UTC timestamps or adjust the retention period to
  account for the offset:
  `adjusted_retention_period = retention_period - UTC offset`
  :::

- **Search Result Expiry:** 
  A search result is considered expired if its retention period has elapsed since the search was 
  completed, i.e. that the difference between T and `search_result.T` has surpassed TTL.
  ```text
  if (T - search_result.T > TTL) then EXPIRED
  ```

---

## Configuration
CLP allows users to configure different **retention_periods** for different types of data. 
Additionally, a custom **sweep_interval** can be set for each type of data, which determines how
frequently its garbage collection job is executed. These settings can be configured in 

> `etc/clp-config.yml`. 

Author: I incorporated part of your change. Given that this is high-level description, I feel that we don't need to mention the exact key in the config.

In my doc, i have been using "data" to refer "either archive or search result". I don't use the latter because later on when we add stream retention it would not require too much change.

Wonder is there any better name? Another option I can think of is "target", and maybe we can define it in the second section? @kirkrodrigues

```yaml
archive_output:
  # ... Other archive_output settings...

  # Retention period for archives, in minutes. 
  # Set to null to disable automatic deletion.
  retention_period: 43200
```

By default, `archive_output.retention_period` is `null`, which means that archives will be retained
indefinitely.

:::{warning}
If your log events use timestamps that *aren't* in the UTC time zone, you will need to adjust the
configured retention period to ensure expired archives are deleted at the correct time. See
[Handling log events with non-UTC timestamps](#handling-log-events-with-non-utc-timestamps) for
details.
:::

#### Archive expiry criteria

For archives, $data\_timestamp$ (in the expiry criteria equation from [Figure 1](#figure-1)) is the
timestamp of the most recent log event contained in the archive.

:::{note}
This is not the timestamp at which your logs were compressed. Therefore, if you compress
particularly old logs that have already expired according to the expiry criteria, they will be
deleted the next time the garbage collector runs.
:::

#### Handling log events with non-UTC timestamps

> If your log events use timestamps that **aren't** in the UTC time zone, you will need to adjust the

Reviewer: not needed

configured retention period to ensure expired archives are deleted at the correct time. This is
because CLP currently doesn't support parsing time zone information, and the garbage collector runs
based on the UTC time zone.

For example, let's say:

* your log events use timestamps in the AWST timezone (UTC+8);
* you set a retention period of 1 hour;
* you have an archive with $data\_timestamp = 08:00$ AWST; and
* the garbage collector runs at $current\_time = 09:01$ AWST.

> 

Reviewer: @kirkrodrigues up to you, I think it's fine how it is

:::{note}
If the value of `archive_output.retention_period` is `null`, the corresponding garbage collection
task will not run even if `garbage_collector.sweep_interval.archive` is configured. The same applies
for `results_cache.retention_period` and `garbage_collector.sweep_interval.search_result`.
:::

---

## Additional concerns

It's worth understanding how CLP's retention system handles data races and ensures fault tolerance,
since these may affect the behavior of how long archives remain queryable and when they're deleted.

### Handling data races

CLP's retention system is designed to avoid deleting expired archives or search results that may
still be in use by active jobs. To do so, CLP employs the following mechanisms:

* If any query job is running, CLP conservatively calculates a **safe expiry timestamp** based on 
  the earliest active search job. This ensures no archive which may be searched by the active job is
  deleted.

* CLP will **not** search an archive once it is considered expired, even if it has not yet been
  deleted by the garbage collector.

:::{warning}
A hanging search job will prevent CLP from deleting expired archives. Restarting the query scheduler

> will mark such jobs as failed and allow garbage collection to resume.

Author: If we are going to merge the scheduler change?
```suggestion
will mark such jobs as killed and allow garbage collection to resume.
```

> # Setting up data retention periods

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Configuring retention periods
```

... which evaluates to false. Thus, the garbage collector won't delete the archive; in fact, it
won't delete it until $09:01$ UTC, which is 8 hours later than it should've been deleted.

Similarly, archives may be deleted prematurely if your log events use timestamps in a time zone that
is behind UTC.

To avoid this issue, you can adjust the retention period to account for the offset of the log
events' time zone from UTC:

$$adjusted\_retention\_period = retention\_period - signed\_utc\_offset$$

### Search result retention period

This setting determines how long search results should be retained before they are automatically
deleted. To configure it, modify the value of `results_cache.retention_period` in
`etc/clp-config.yml`.

For example, to configure a search result retention period of 1 day (1,440 minutes), use:

```yaml
results_cache:
  # ... Other results_cache settings...

  # Retention period for search results, in minutes. 
  # Set to null to disable automatic deletion.
  retention_period: 1440
```

By default, `results_cache.retention_period` is `60`, which means that search results will be
retained for 60 minutes (1 hour).

:::{note}

> When a user runs consecutive queries in the webui without refreshing the page, the results of one

Author: how about? or maybe something like "current query"
```suggestion
When a user runs consecutive queries in the webui without refreshing the page, the results of the previous
```
